---
layout: post
title: Building my NBA MVP Predictor
---

For as long as I can remember I’ve been a big fan of basketball. I enjoy playing basketball, watching basketball, and following and debating the NBA. One of the biggest conversations in basketball is comparing different players to each other and who should be awarded certain accolades. This most prestigious of which in the NBA is the Most Valuable Player award. This is awarded to whom the voters deem as, you guessed it, the most valuable player in the league. Growing up when debating one player over another I would always use stats to back up my arguments. So when I decided to take on a project to do on my own time this fall semester I decided to see if I can use a machine learning model to accurately predict which players would win the MVP award.

The first challenge I ran into was determining how to decide if a player wins or not. Looking deeper into the process for determining MVP I saw that 121 selected voters were to assign players votes ranging from first place (most valuable) to fifth place (fifth most valuable). Historically, it comes down to who gets the most first place votes. There hasn’t been an instance of a player winning the award from getting a lot of 2nd place votes. So I decided to predict the amount of first place votes a player would get.

The next challenge I faced was which statistics I would use to predict the number of votes. Using basketball-reference.com to collect the stats, I took every player that received votes for MVP in the past 10 years and recorded their advanced statistics. I chose advanced statistics because they can give a better indication on a player’s performance and impact on the game. In addition to this I didn’t base predictions on the players’ raw stats rather I chose their rank in the league for the year. Reason being, the MVP award is given to the most valuable player for that year. Just using the raw numbers would have the model make predictions based on every players performance in the history of the league rather than against the performances of other players from that season. Doing this I had the necessary to make predictions.
